{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1347\cocoasubrtf570
{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;\f1\fswiss\fcharset0 ArialMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red26\green26\blue26;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww12600\viewh13520\viewkind0
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural

\f0\fs24 \cf0 #
\f1\fs20 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
One \
\uc0\u8232 The Tao that can be told is not the eternal Tao. \u8232 The name that can be named is not the eternal name. \u8232 The nameless is the beginning of heaven and Earth. \u8232 The named is the mother of the ten thousand things. \u8232 Ever desireless, one can see the mystery. \u8232 Ever desiring, one sees the manifestations. \u8232 These two spring from the same source but differ in name; this appears as darkness. \u8232 Darkness within darkness. \u8232 The gate to all mystery.\
\pard\pardeftab720
\cf2 \'a0\
\uc0\u8232 \
\uc0\u8232 \
#Two \
\uc0\u8232 Under heaven all can see beauty as beauty only because there is ugliness. \u8232 All can know good as good only because there is evil. \u8232 Therefore having and not having arise together. \u8232 Difficult and easy complement each other. \u8232 Long and short contrast each other: \u8232 High and low rest upon each other; \u8232 Voice and sound harmonize each other; \u8232 Front and back follow one another.\
Therefore the sage goes about doing nothing, teaching no-talking. \uc0\u8232 The ten thousand things rise and fall without cease, \u8232 Creating, yet not possessing.\u8232 Working, yet not taking credit. \u8232 Work is done, then forgotten. \u8232 Therefore it lasts forever.\
\'a0\
\uc0\u8232 \
\uc0\u8232 \
#Three \
\uc0\u8232 Not exalting the gifted prevents quarreling. \u8232 Not collecting treasures prevents stealing. \u8232 Not seeing desirable things prevents confusion of the heart. \u8232 The wise therefore rule by emptying hearts and stuffing bellies, by weakening ambitions and strengthening bones. \u8232 If men lack knowledge and desire, then clever people will not try to interfere. \u8232 If nothing is done, then all will be well.\
\'a0\
\uc0\u8232 \
\uc0\u8232 \
#Four\
 \uc0\u8232 The Tao is an empty vessel; it is used, but never filled. \u8232 Oh, unfathomable source of ten thousand things! \u8232 Blunt the sharpness, \u8232 Untangle the knot, \u8232 Soften the glare, \u8232 Merge with dust. \u8232 Oh, hidden deep but ever present! \u8232 I do not know from whence it comes. \u8232 It is the forefather of the gods.\
\'a0\
\uc0\u8232 \
\uc0\u8232 \
\pard\pardeftab720
\cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
#\cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Five\
 \uc0\u8232 Heaven and Earth are impartial; \u8232 They see the ten thousand things as straw dogs. \u8232 The wise are impartial; \u8232 They see the people as straw dogs. \u8232 The space between heaven and Earth is like a bellows. \u8232 The shape changes but not the form; \u8232 The more it moves, the more it yields. \u8232 More words count less. \u8232 Hold fast to the center.\
\'a0\
\uc0\u8232 \
\uc0\u8232 \
\cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
#\cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Six \
\uc0\u8232 The valley spirit never dies; \u8232 It is the woman, primal mother. \u8232 Her gateway is the root of heaven and Earth. \u8232 It is like a veil barely seen. \u8232 Use it; it will never fail.\
\'a0\
\uc0\u8232 \
\uc0\u8232 \
#Seven \
\uc0\u8232 Heaven and Earth last forever. \u8232 Why do heaven and Earth last forever? \u8232 They are unborn, \u8232 So ever living. \u8232 The sage stays behind, thus he is ahead. \u8232 He is detached, thus at one with all. \u8232 Through selfless action, he attains fulfillment.\
\'a0\
\uc0\u8232 \
\uc0\u8232 \
#Eight \
\uc0\u8232 The highest good is like water. \u8232 Water give life to the ten thousand things and does not strive. \u8232 It flows in places men reject and so is like the Tao. \u8232 In dwelling, be close to the land. \u8232 In meditation, go deep in the heart. \u8232 In dealing with others, be gentle and kind. \u8232 In speech, be true. \u8232 In ruling, be just. \u8232 In daily life, be competent. \u8232 In action, be aware of the time and the season.\
No fight: No blame.\
\'a0\
\uc0\u8232 \
\uc0\u8232 \
#Nine \
\uc0\u8232 Better to stop short than fill to the brim. \u8232 Oversharpen the blade, and the edge will soon blunt. \u8232 Amass a store of gold and jade, and no one can protect it. \u8232 Claim wealth and titles, and disaster will follow. \u8232 Retire when the work is done. \u8232 This is the way of heaven.\
\'a0\
\uc0\u8232 \
\uc0\u8232 \
#Ten \
\uc0\u8232 Carrying body and soul and embracing the one, \u8232 Can you avoid separation? \u8232 Attending fully and becoming supple, \u8232 Can you be as a newborn babe? \u8232 Washing and cleansing the primal vision, \u8232 Can you be without stain? \u8232 Loving all men and ruling the country, \u8232 Can you be without cleverness? \u8232 Opening and closing the gates of heaven, \u8232 Can you play the role of woman? \u8232 Understanding and being open to all things, \u8232 Are you able to do nothing? \u8232 Giving birth and nourishing, \u8232 Bearing yet not possessing, \u8232 Working yet not taking credit, \u8232 Leading yet not dominating, \u8232 This is the Primal Virtue.\
\'a0\
\uc0\u8232 \
\uc0\u8232 \
#Eleven \
\uc0\u8232 Thirty spokes share the wheel's hub; \u8232 It is the center hole that makes it useful. \u8232 Shape clay into a vessel; \u8232 It is the space within that makes it useful. \u8232 Cut doors and windows for a room; \u8232 It is the holes which make it useful. \u8232 Therefore benefit comes from what is there; \u8232 Usefulness from what is not there.\
\'a0\
\uc0\u8232 \
\uc0\u8232 \
#Twelve \
\uc0\u8232 The five colors blind the eye. \u8232 The five tones deafen the ear. \u8232 The five flavors dull the taste. \u8232 Racing and hunting madden the mind. \u8232 Precious things lead one astray. \u8232 Therefore the sage is guided by what he feels and not by what he sees. \u8232 He lets go of that and chooses this.\
\'a0\
\uc0\u8232 \
\uc0\u8232 \
#Thirteen \
\uc0\u8232 Accept disgrace willingly. \u8232 Accept misfortune as the human condition. \u8232 What do you mean by "Accept disgrace willingly"? \u8232 Accept being unimportant. \u8232 Do not be concerned with loss or gain. \u8232 This is called "accepting disgrace willingly."\
What do you mean by "Accept misfortune as the human condition"? \uc0\u8232 Misfortune comes from having a body. \u8232 Without a body, how could there be misfortune?\
Surrender yourself humbly; then you can be trusted to care for all things. \uc0\u8232 Love the world as your own self; then you can truly care for all things.\
\'a0\
\uc0\u8232 \
\uc0\u8232 \
#Fourteen \
\uc0\u8232 Look, it cannot be seen - it is beyond form. \u8232 Listen, it cannot be heard - it is beyond sound. \u8232 Grasp, it cannot be held - it is intangible. \u8232 These three are indefinable; \u8232 Therefore they are joined in one. \u8232 From above it is not bright; \u8232 From below it is not dark: \u8232 An unbroken thread beyond description. \u8232 It returns to nothingness. \u8232 The form of the formless, \u8232 The image of the imageless, \u8232 It is called indefinable and beyond imagination.\
Stand before it and there is no beginning. \uc0\u8232 Follow it and there is no end. \u8232 Stay with the ancient Tao, \u8232 Move with the present.\
Knowing the ancient beginning is the essence of Tao.\
\'a0\
\uc0\u8232 \
\uc0\u8232 \
#Fifteen \
\uc0\u8232 The ancient masters were subtle, mysterious, profound, responsive. \u8232 The depth of their knowledge is unfathomable. \u8232 Because it is unfathomable, \u8232 All we can do is describe their appearance. \u8232 Watchful, like men crossing a winter stream. \u8232 Alert, like men aware of danger. \u8232 Courteous, like visiting guests. \u8232 Yielding like ice about to melt. \u8232 Simple, like uncarved blocks of wood. \u8232 Hollow, like caves. \u8232 Opaque, like muddy pools. \u8232 Who can wait quietly while the mud settles? \u8232 Who can remain still until the moment of action? \u8232 Observers of the Tao do not seek fulfillment. \u8232 Not seeking fulfillment, they are not swayed by desire for change.\
\'a0\
\uc0\u8232 \
\uc0\u8232 \
#Sixteen \
\uc0\u8232 Empty yourself of everything. \u8232 Let the mind become still. \u8232 The ten thousand things rise and fall while the Self watches their return. \u8232 They grow and flourish and then return to the source. \u8232 Returning to the source is stillness, which is the way of nature. \u8232 The way of nature is unchanging. \u8232 Knowing constancy is insight. \u8232 Not knowing constancy leads to disaster. \u8232 Knowing constancy, the mind is open. \u8232 With an open mind, you will be openhearted. \u8232 Being openhearted, you will act royally. \u8232 Being royal, you will attain the divine. \u8232 Being divine, you will be at one with the Tao. \u8232 Being at one with the Tao is eternal. \u8232 And though the body dies, the Tao will never pass away.\
\'a0\
\uc0\u8232 \
\uc0\u8232 \
#Seventeen \
\uc0\u8232 The very highest if barely known. \u8232 Then comes that which people know and love. \u8232 Then that which is feared, \u8232 Then that which is despised. \u8232 Who does not trust enough will not be trusted.\
When actions are performed \uc0\u8232 Without unnecessary speech, \u8232 People say, "We did it!"\
\'a0\
\uc0\u8232 \
\uc0\u8232 \
#Eighteen \
\uc0\u8232 When the great Tao is forgotten, \u8232 Kindness and morality arise. \u8232 When wisdom and intelligence are born, \u8232 The great pretense begins. \u8232 When there is no peace within the family, \u8232 Filial piety and devotion arise. \u8232 When the country is confused and in chaos, \u8232 Loyal ministers appear.\
\'a0\
\uc0\u8232 \
\uc0\u8232 \
#Nineteen \
\uc0\u8232 Give up sainthood, renounce wisdom, \u8232 And it will be a hundred times better for everyone. \u8232 Give up kindness, renounce morality, \u8232 And men will rediscover filial piety and love.\
Give up ingenuity, renounce profit, \uc0\u8232 And bandits and thieves will disappear.\
These three are outward forms alone; they are not sufficient in themselves. \uc0\u8232 It is more important \u8232 To see the simplicity, \u8232 To realize one's true nature, \u8232 To cast off selfishness \u8232 And temper desire.\
\'a0\
\uc0\u8232 \
\uc0\u8232 \
#Twenty \
\uc0\u8232 Give up learning, and put an end to your troubles. \u8232 Is there a difference between yes and no? \u8232 Is there a difference between good and evil? \u8232 Must I fear what others fear? What nonsense! \u8232 Other people are contented, enjoying the sacrificial feast of the ox. \u8232 In spring some go to the park, and climb the terrace, \u8232 But I alone am drifting, not knowing where I am. \u8232 Like a newborn babe before it learns to smile, \u8232 I am alone, without a place to go. \u8232 Others have more than they need, but I alone have nothing. \u8232 I am a fool. Oh, yes! I am confused. \u8232 Others are clear and bright, \u8232 But I alone am dim and weak. \u8232 Others are sharp and clever, \u8232 But I alone am dull and stupid. \u8232 Oh, I drift like the waves of the sea, \u8232 Without direction, like the restless wind. \u8232 Everyone else is busy, \u8232 But I alone am aimless and depressed. \u8232 I am different. \u8232 I am nourished by the great mother.\
\'a0\
\uc0\u8232 \
\uc0\u8232 \
#Twenty-one \
\uc0\u8232 The greatest Virtue is to follow Tao and Tao alone. \u8232 The Tao is elusive and intangible. \u8232 Oh, it is intangible and elusive, and yet within is image. \u8232 Oh, it is elusive and intangible, and yet within is form. \u8232 Oh, it is dim and dark, and yet within is essence. \u8232 This essence is very real, and therein lies faith. \u8232 From the very beginning until now its name has never been forgotten. \u8232 Thus I perceive the creation. \u8232 How do I know the ways of creation? \u8232 Because of this.\
\'a0\
\uc0\u8232 \
\uc0\u8232 \
#Twenty-two \
\uc0\u8232 Yield and overcome; \u8232 Bend and be straight; \u8232 Empty and be full; \u8232 Wear out and be new; \u8232 Have little and gain; \u8232 Have much and be confused. \u8232 Therefore the wise embrace the one \u8232 And set an example to all. \u8232 Not putting on a display, \u8232 They shine forth. \u8232 Not justifying themselves, \u8232 They are distinguished. \u8232 Not boasting, \u8232 They receive recognition. \u8232 Not bragging, \u8232 They never falter. \u8232 They do not quarrel, \u8232 So no one quarrels with them. \u8232 Therefore the ancients say, "Yield and overcome." \u8232 Is that an empty saying? \u8232 Be really whole, \u8232 And all things will come to you.\
\'a0\
\uc0\u8232 \
\uc0\u8232 \
#Twenty-three \
\uc0\u8232 To talk little is natural. \u8232 High winds do not last all morning. \u8232 Heavy rain does not last all day. \u8232 Why is this? Heaven and Earth! \u8232 If heaven and Earth cannot make things eternal, \u8232 How is it possible for man? \u8232 He who follows the Tao \u8232 Is at one with the Tao. \u8232 He who is virtuous \u8232 Experiences Virtue. \u8232 He who loses the way \u8232 Is lost. \u8232 When you are at one with the Tao, \u8232 The Tao welcomes you. \u8232 When you are at one with Virtue, \u8232 The Virtue is always there. \u8232 When you are at one with loss, \u8232 The loss is experienced willingly. \u8232 He who does not trust enough \u8232 Will not be trusted.\
\'a0\
\uc0\u8232 \
\uc0\u8232 \
#Twenty-four \
\uc0\u8232 He who stands on tiptoe is not steady. \u8232 He who strides cannot maintain the pace. \u8232 He who makes a show is not enlightened. \u8232 He who is self-righteous is not respected. \u8232 He who boasts achieves nothing. \u8232 He who brags will not endure. \u8232 According to followers of the Tao, "These are extra food and unnecessary luggage." \u8232 They do not bring happiness. \u8232 therefore followers of the Tao avoid them.\
\'a0\
\uc0\u8232 \
\uc0\u8232 \
#Twenty-five \
\uc0\u8232 Something mysteriously formed, \u8232 Born before heaven and Earth. \u8232 In the silence and the void, \u8232 Standing alone and unchanging, \u8232 Ever present and in motion. \u8232 Perhaps it is the mother of ten thousand things. \u8232 I do not know its name \u8232 Call it Tao. \u8232 For lack of a better word, I call it great. \u8232 Being great, it flows \u8232 I flows far away. \u8232 Having gone far, it returns.\
Therefore, "Tao is great; \uc0\u8232 Heaven is great; \u8232 Earth is great; \u8232 The king is also great." \u8232 These are the four great powers of the universe, \u8232 And the king is one of them.\
Man follows Earth. \uc0\u8232 Earth follows heaven. \u8232 Heaven follows the Tao. \u8232 Tao follows what is natural.\
\'a0\
\uc0\u8232 \
\uc0\u8232 \
#Twenty-six \
\uc0\u8232 The heavy is the root of the light. \u8232 The still is the master of unrest. \u8232 Therefore the sage, traveling all day, \u8232 Does not lose sight of his baggage. \u8232 Though there are beautiful things to be seen, \u8232 He remains unattached and calm.\
Why should the lord of ten thousand chariots act lightly in public? \uc0\u8232 To be light is to lose one's root. \u8232 To be restless is to lose one's control.\
\'a0\
\uc0\u8232 \
\uc0\u8232 \
#Twenty-seven \
\uc0\u8232 A good walker leaves no tracks; \u8232 A good speaker makes no slips; \u8232 A good reckoner needs no tally. \u8232 A good door needs no lock, \u8232 Yet no one can open it. \u8232 Good binding requires no knots, \u8232 Yet no one can loosen it. \u8232 Therefore the sage takes care of all men \u8232 And abandons no one. \u8232 He takes care of all things \u8232 And abandons nothing.\
This is called "following the light."\
What is a good man? \uc0\u8232 A teacher of a bad man. \u8232 What is a bad man? \u8232 A good man's charge. \u8232 If the teacher is not respected, \u8232 And the student not cared for, \u8232 Confusion will arise, however clever one is. \u8232 This is the crux of mystery.\
\'a0\
\uc0\u8232 \
\uc0\u8232 \
#Twenty-eight \
\uc0\u8232 Know the strength of man, \u8232 But keep a woman's care! \u8232 Be the stream of the universe! \u8232 Being the stream of the universe, \u8232 Ever true and unswerving, \u8232 Become as a little child once more. \u8232 Know the white, \u8232 But keep the black! \u8232 Be an example to the world! \u8232 Being an example to the world, \u8232 Ever true and unwavering, \u8232 Return to the infinite.\
Know honor, \uc0\u8232 Yet keep humility. \u8232 Be the valley of the universe! \u8232 Being the valley of the universe, \u8232 Ever true and resourceful, \u8232 Return to the state of the uncarved block.\
When the block is carved, it becomes useful. \uc0\u8232 When the sage uses it, he becomes the ruler. \u8232 Thus, "A great tailor cuts little."\
\'a0\
\uc0\u8232 \
\uc0\u8232 \
#Twenty-nine \
\uc0\u8232 Do you think you can take over the universe and improve it? \u8232 I do not believe it can be done. \u8232 The universe is sacred. \u8232 You cannot improve it. \u8232 If you try to change it, you will ruin it. \u8232 If you try to hold it, you will lose it.\
So sometimes things are ahead and sometimes they are behind; \uc0\u8232 Sometimes breathing is hard, sometimes it comes easily; \u8232 Sometimes there is strength and sometimes weakness; \u8232 Sometimes one is up and sometimes down.\
Therefore the sage avoids extremes, excesses, and complacency.\
\'a0\
\uc0\u8232 \
\uc0\u8232 \
#Thirty \
\uc0\u8232 Whenever you advise a ruler in the way of Tao, \u8232 Counsel him not to use force to conquer the universe. \u8232 For this would only cause resistance. \u8232 Thorn bushes spring up wherever the army has passed. \u8232 Lean years follow in the wake of a great war. \u8232 Just do what needs to be done. \u8232 Never take advantage of power. \u8232 Achieve results, \u8232 But never glory in them. \u8232 Achieve results, \u8232 But never boast. \u8232 Achieve results, \u8232 But never be proud. \u8232 Achieve results, \u8232 Because this is the natural way. \u8232 Achieve results, \u8232 But not through violence.\
Force is followed by loss of strength. \uc0\u8232 This is not the way of Tao. \u8232 That which goes against the Tao comes to an early end.\
\'a0\
\uc0\u8232 \
\uc0\u8232 \
#Thirty-one \
\uc0\u8232 Good weapons are instruments of fear; all creatures hate them. \u8232 Therefore followers of Tao never use them. \u8232 The wise man prefers the left. \u8232 The man of war prefers the right. \u8232 Weapons are instruments of fear; they are not a wise man's tools. \u8232 He uses them only when he has no choice. \u8232 Peace and quiet are dear to his heart, \u8232 And victory no cause for rejoicing. \u8232 If you rejoice in victory, then you delight in killing; \u8232 If you delight in killing, you cannot fulfill yourself.\
On happy occasions precedence is given to the left, \uc0\u8232 On sad occasions to the right. \u8232 In the army the general stands on the left, \u8232 The commander-in-chief on the right. \u8232 This means that war is conducted like a funeral. \u8232 When many people are being killed, \u8232 They should be mourned in heartfelt sorrow. \u8232 That is why a victory must be observed like a funeral.\
\'a0\
\uc0\u8232 \
\uc0\u8232 \
#Thirty-two \
\uc0\u8232 The Tao is forever undefined. \u8232 Small though it is in the unformed state, it cannot be grasped. \u8232 If kings and lords could harness it, \u8232 The ten thousand things would come together \u8232 And gentle rain fall. \u8232 Men would need no more instruction and all things would take their course. \u8232 Once the whole is divided, the parts need names. \u8232 There are already enough names. \u8232 One must know when to stop. \u8232 Knowing when to stop averts trouble. \u8232 Tao in the world is like a river flowing home to the sea.\
\'a0\
\uc0\u8232 \
\uc0\u8232 \
#Thirty-three \
\uc0\u8232 Knowing others is wisdom; \u8232 Knowing the self is enlightenment. \u8232 Mastering others requires force; \u8232 Mastering the self needs strength. \u8232 He who knows he has enough is rich. \u8232 Perseverance is a sign of willpower. \u8232 He who stays where he is endures. \u8232 To die but not to perish is to be eternally present.\
\'a0\
\uc0\u8232 \
\uc0\u8232 \
#Thirty-four \
\uc0\u8232 The great Tao flows everywhere, both to the left and to the right. \u8232 The ten thousand things depend upon it; it holds nothing back. \u8232 It fulfills its purpose silently and makes no claim. \u8232 It nourishes the ten thousand things, \u8232 And yet is not their lord. \u8232 It has no aim; it is very small.\
The ten thousand things return to it, \uc0\u8232 Yet it is not their lord. \u8232 It is very great.\
It does not show greatness, \uc0\u8232 And is therefore truly great.\
\'a0\
\uc0\u8232 \
\uc0\u8232 \
#Thirty-five \
\uc0\u8232 All men will come to him who keeps to the one, \u8232 For there lie rest and happiness and peace. \u8232 Passersby may stop for music and good food, \u8232 But a description of the Tao \u8232 Seems without substance or flavor. \u8232 It cannot be seen, it cannot be heard, \u8232 And yet it cannot be exhausted.\
\'a0\
\uc0\u8232 \
\uc0\u8232 \
#Thirty-six \
\uc0\u8232 That which shrinks \u8232 Must first expand. \u8232 That which fails \u8232 Must first be strong. \u8232 That which is cast down \u8232 Must first be raised. \u8232 Before receiving \u8232 There must be giving. \u8232 This is called perception of the nature of things. \u8232 Soft and weak overcome hard and strong.\
Fish cannot leave deep waters, \uc0\u8232 And a country's weapons should not be displayed.\
\'a0\
\uc0\u8232 \
\uc0\u8232 \
#Thirty-seven \
\uc0\u8232 Tao abides in non-action, \u8232 Yet nothing is left undone. \u8232 If kings and lords observed this, \u8232 The ten thousand things would develop naturally. \u8232 If they still desired to act, \u8232 They would return to the simplicity of formless substance. \u8232 Without form there is no desire. \u8232 Without desire there is tranquility. \u8232 And in this way all things would be at peace.\
\'a0\
\uc0\u8232 \
\uc0\u8232 \
#Thirty-eight \
\uc0\u8232 A truly good man is not aware of his goodness, \u8232 And is therefore good. \u8232 A foolish man tries to be good, \u8232 And is therefore not good. \u8232 A truly good man does nothing, \u8232 Yet leaves nothing undone. \u8232 A foolish man is always doing, \u8232 Yet much remains to be done.\
When a truly kind man does something, he leaves nothing undone. \uc0\u8232 When a just man does something, he leaves a great deal to be done. \u8232 When a disciplinarian does something and no one responds, \u8232 He rolls up his sleeves in an attempt to enforce order.\
Therefore when Tao is lost, there is goodness. \uc0\u8232 When goodness is lost, there is kindness. \u8232 When kindness is lost, there is justice. \u8232 When justice is lost, there ritual. \u8232 Now ritual is the husk of faith and loyalty, the beginning of confusion. \u8232 Knowledge of the future is only a flowery trapping of Tao. \u8232 It is the beginning of folly.\
Therefore the truly great man dwells on what is real and not what is on the surface, \uc0\u8232 On the fruit and not the flower. \u8232 Therefore accept the one and reject the other.\
\'a0\
\uc0\u8232 \
\uc0\u8232 \
#Thirty-nine \
\uc0\u8232 These things from ancient times arise from one: \u8232 The sky is whole and clear. \u8232 The earth is whole and firm. \u8232 The spirit is whole and strong. \u8232 The valley is whole and full. \u8232 The ten thousand things are whole and alive. \u8232 Kings and lords are whole, and the country is upright. \u8232 All these are in virtue of wholeness. \u8232 The clarity of the sky prevents its falling. \u8232 The firmness of the earth prevents its splitting. \u8232 The strength of the spirit prevents its being used up. \u8232 The fullness of the valley prevents its running dry. \u8232 The growth of the ten thousand things prevents their drying out. \u8232 The leadership of kings and lords prevents the downfall of the country.\
Therefore the humble is the root of the noble. \uc0\u8232 The low is the foundation of the high. \u8232 Princes and lords consider themselves "orphaned", "widowed" and "worthless". \u8232 Do they not depend on being humble?\
Too much success is not an advantage. \uc0\u8232 Do not tinkle like jade \u8232 Or clatter like stone chimes.\
\'a0\
\uc0\u8232 \
\uc0\u8232 \
#Forty \
\uc0\u8232 Returning is the motion of the Tao. \u8232 Yielding is the way of the Tao. \u8232 The ten thousand things are born of being. \u8232 Being is born of not being.\
\'a0\
\uc0\u8232 \
\uc0\u8232 \
#Forty-one\
 \uc0\u8232 The wise student hears of the Tao and practices it diligently. \u8232 The average student hears of the Tao and gives it thought now and again. \u8232 The foolish student hears of the Tao and laughs aloud. \u8232 If there were no laughter, the Tao would not be what it is. \u8232 Hence it is said: \u8232 The bright path seems dim; \u8232 Going forward seems like retreat; \u8232 The easy way seems hard; \u8232 The highest Virtue seems empty; \u8232 Great purity seems sullied; \u8232 A wealth of Virtue seems inadequate; \u8232 The strength of Virtue seems frail; \u8232 Real Virtue seems unreal; \u8232 The perfect square has no corners; \u8232 Great talents ripen late; \u8232 The highest notes are hard to hear; \u8232 The greatest form has no shape; \u8232 The Tao is hidden and without name. \u8232 The Tao alone nourishes and brings everything to fulfillment.\
\'a0\
\uc0\u8232 \
\uc0\u8232 \
#Forty-two \
\uc0\u8232 The Tao begot one. \u8232 One begot two. \u8232 Two begot three. \u8232 And three begot the ten thousand things. \u8232 The ten thousand things carry yin and embrace yang. \u8232 They achieve harmony by combining these forces.\
Men hate to be "orphaned," "widowed," or "worthless," \uc0\u8232 But this is how kings and lords describe themselves.\
For one gains by losing \uc0\u8232 And loses by gaining.\
What others teach, I also teach; that is: \uc0\u8232 "A violent man will die a violent death!" \u8232 This will be the essence of my teaching.\
\'a0\
\uc0\u8232 \
\uc0\u8232 \
#Forty-three \
\uc0\u8232 The softest thing in the universe \u8232 Overcomes the hardest thing in the universe. \u8232 That without substance can enter where there is no room. \u8232 Hence I know the value of non-action. \u8232 Teaching without words and work without doing \u8232 Are understood by very few.\
\'a0\
\uc0\u8232 \
\uc0\u8232 \
#Forty-four \
\uc0\u8232 Fame or self: Which matters more? \u8232 Self or wealth: Which is more precious? \u8232 Gain or loss: Which is more painful? \u8232 He who is attached to things will suffer much. \u8232 He who saves will suffer heavy loss. \u8232 A contented man is never disappointed. \u8232 He who knows when to stop does not find himself in trouble. \u8232 He will stay forever safe.\
\'a0\
\uc0\u8232 \
\uc0\u8232 \
#Forty-five \
\uc0\u8232 Great accomplishment seems imperfect, \u8232 Yet it does not outlive its usefulness. \u8232 Great fullness seems empty, \u8232 Yet cannot be exhausted. \u8232 Great straightness seems twisted. \u8232 Great intelligence seems stupid. \u8232 Great eloquence seems awkward.\
Movement overcomes cold. \uc0\u8232 Stillness overcomes heat. \u8232 Stillness and tranquillity set things in order in the universe.\
\'a0\
\uc0\u8232 \
\uc0\u8232 \
#Forty-six \
\uc0\u8232 When the Tao is present in the universe, \u8232 The horses haul manure. \u8232 When the Tao is absent from the universe, \u8232 War horses are bred outside the city. \u8232 There is no greater sin than desire, \u8232 No greater curse than discontent, \u8232 No greater misfortune than wanting something for oneself. \u8232 Therefore he who knows that enough is enough will always have enough.\
\'a0\
\uc0\u8232 \
\uc0\u8232 \
#Forty-seven \
\uc0\u8232 Without going outside, you may know the whole world. \u8232 Without looking through the window, you may see the ways of heaven. \u8232 The farther you go, the less you know. \u8232 Thus the sage knows without traveling; \u8232 He sees without looking; \u8232 He works without doing.\
\'a0\
\uc0\u8232 \
\uc0\u8232 \
#Forty-eight \uc0\u8232 In the pursuit of learning, every day something is acquired. \u8232 In the pursuit of Tao, every day something is dropped. \u8232 Less and less is done \u8232 Until non-action is achieved. \u8232 When nothing is done, nothing is left undone.\
The world is ruled by letting things take their course. \uc0\u8232 It cannot be ruled by interfering.\
\'a0\
\uc0\u8232 \
\uc0\u8232 \
#Forty-nine \uc0\u8232 The sage has no mind of his own. \u8232 He is aware of the needs of others. \u8232 I am good to people who are good. \u8232 I am also good to people who are not good. \u8232 Because Virtue is goodness. \u8232 I have faith in people who are faithful. \u8232 I also have faith in people who are not faithful. \u8232 Because Virtue is faithfulness.\
The sage is shy and humble - to the world he seems confusing. \uc0\u8232 Others look to him and listen. \u8232 He behaves like a little child.\
\uc0\u8232 \'a0\
\uc0\u8232 \
\uc0\u8232 \
#Fifty \uc0\u8232 Between birth and death, \u8232 Three in ten are followers of life, \u8232 Three in ten are followers of death, \u8232 And men just passing from birth to death also number three in ten. \u8232 Why is this so? \u8232 Because they live their lives on the gross level. \u8232 He who knows how to live can walk abroad \u8232 Without fear of rhinoceros or tiger. \u8232 He will not be wounded in battle. \u8232 For in him rhinoceroses can find no place to thrust their horn, \u8232 Tigers no place to use their claws, \u8232 And weapons no place to pierce. \u8232 Why is this so? \u8232 Because he has no place for death to enter.\
\'a0\
\uc0\u8232 \
\uc0\u8232 \
#Fifty-one \uc0\u8232 All things arise from Tao. \u8232 They are nourished by Virtue. \u8232 They are formed from matter. \u8232 They are shaped by environment. \u8232 Thus the ten thousand things all respect Tao and honor Virtue. \u8232 Respect of Tao and honor of Virtue are not demanded, \u8232 But they are in the nature of things. \u8232 Therefore all things arise from Tao. \u8232 By Virtue they are nourished, \u8232 Developed, cared for, \u8232 Sheltered, comforted, \u8232 Grown, and protected. \u8232 Creating without claiming, \u8232 Doing without taking credit, \u8232 Guiding without interfering, \u8232 This is Primal Virtue.\
\'a0\
\uc0\u8232 \
\uc0\u8232 \
#Fifty-two \uc0\u8232 The beginning of the universe \u8232 Is the mother of all things. \u8232 Knowing the mother, one also knows the sons. \u8232 Knowing the sons, yet remaining in touch with the mother, \u8232 Brings freedom from the fear of death. \u8232 Keep your mouth shut, \u8232 Guard the senses, \u8232 And life is ever full. \u8232 Open your mouth, \u8232 Always be busy, \u8232 And life is beyond hope.\
Seeing the small is insight; \uc0\u8232 Yielding to force is strength. \u8232 Using the outer light, return to insight, \u8232 And in this way be saved from harm. \u8232 This is learning constancy.\
\'a0\
\uc0\u8232 \
\uc0\u8232 \
#Fifty-three \uc0\u8232 If I have even just a little sense, \u8232 I will walk on the main road and my only fear \u8232 will be of straying from it. \u8232 Keeping to the main road is easy, \u8232 But people love to be sidetracked. \u8232 When the court is arrayed in splendor, \u8232 The fields are full of weeds, \u8232 And the granaries are bare. \u8232 Some wear gorgeous clothes, \u8232 Carry sharp swords, \u8232 And indulge themselves with food and drink; \u8232 They have more possessions than they can use. \u8232 They are robber barons. \u8232 This is certainly not the way of Tao.\
\'a0\
\uc0\u8232 \
\uc0\u8232 \
#Fifty-four \uc0\u8232 What is firmly established cannot be uprooted. \u8232 What is firmly grasped cannot slip away. \u8232 It will be honored from generation to generation. \u8232 Cultivate Virtue in your self, \u8232 And Virtue will be real. \u8232 Cultivate it in the family, \u8232 And Virtue will abound. \u8232 Cultivate it in the village, \u8232 And Virtue will grow. \u8232 Cultivate it in the nation, \u8232 And Virtue will be abundant. \u8232 Cultivate it in the universe, \u8232 And Virtue will be everywhere.\
Therefore look at the body as body; \uc0\u8232 Look at the family as family; \u8232 Look at the village as village; \u8232 Look at the nation as nation; \u8232 Look at the universe as universe.\
How do I know the universe is like this? \uc0\u8232 By looking!\
\'a0\
\uc0\u8232 \
\uc0\u8232 \
#Fifty-five \uc0\u8232 He who is filled with Virtue is like a newborn child. \u8232 Wasps and serpents will not sting him; \u8232 Wild beasts will not pounce upon him; \u8232 He will not be attacked by birds of prey. \u8232 His bones are soft, his muscles weak, \u8232 But his grip is firm. \u8232 He has not experienced the union of man and woman, but is whole. \u8232 His manhood is strong. \u8232 He screams all day without becoming hoarse. \u8232 This is perfect harmony. \u8232 Knowing harmony is constancy. \u8232 Knowing constancy is enlightenment.\
It is not wise to rush about. \uc0\u8232 Controlling the breath causes strain. \u8232 If too much energy is used, exhaustion follows. \u8232 This is not the way of Tao. \u8232 Whatever is contrary to Tao will not last long.\
\'a0\
\uc0\u8232 \
\uc0\u8232 \
#Fifty-six \uc0\u8232 Those who know do not talk. \u8232 Those who talk do not know. \u8232 Keep your mouth closed. \u8232 Guard your senses. \u8232 Temper your sharpness. \u8232 Simplify your problems. \u8232 Mask your brightness. \u8232 Be at one with the dust of the Earth. \u8232 This is primal union.\
He who has achieved this state \uc0\u8232 Is unconcerned with friends and enemies, \u8232 With good and harm, with honor and disgrace. \u8232 This therefore is the highest state of man.\
\'a0\
\uc0\u8232 \
\uc0\u8232 \
#Fifty-seven \uc0\u8232 Rule a nation with justice. \u8232 Wage war with surprise moves. \u8232 Become master of the universe without striving. \u8232 How do I know that this is so? \u8232 Because of this! \u8232 The more laws and restrictions there are, \u8232 The poorer people become. \u8232 The sharper men's weapons, \u8232 The more trouble in the land. \u8232 The more ingenious and clever men are, \u8232 The more strange things happen. \u8232 The more rules and regulations, \u8232 The more thieves and robbers.\
Therefore the sage says: \uc0\u8232 I take no action and people are reformed. \u8232 I enjoy peace and people become honest. \u8232 I do nothing and people become rich. \u8232 I have no desires and people return to the good and simple life.\
\'a0\
\uc0\u8232 \
\uc0\u8232 \
#Fifty-eight \uc0\u8232 When the country is ruled with a light hand \u8232 The people are simple. \u8232 When the country is ruled with severity, \u8232 The people are cunning. \u8232 Happiness is rooted in misery. \u8232 Misery lurks beneath happiness. \u8232 Who knows what the future holds? \u8232 There is no honesty. \u8232 Honesty becomes dishonest. \u8232 Goodness becomes witchcraft. \u8232 Man's bewitchment lasts for a long time.\
Therefore the sage is sharp but not cutting, \uc0\u8232 Pointed but not piercing, \u8232 Straightforward but not unrestrained, \u8232 Brilliant but not blinding.\
\'a0\
\uc0\u8232 \
\uc0\u8232 \
#Fifty-nine \uc0\u8232 In caring for others and serving heaven, \u8232 There is nothing like using restraint. \u8232 Restraint begins with giving up one's own ideas. \u8232 This depends on Virtue gathered in the past. \u8232 If there is a good store of Virtue, then nothing is impossible. \u8232 If nothing is impossible, then there are no limits. \u8232 If a man knows no limits, then he is fit to be a ruler. \u8232 The mother principle of ruling holds good for a long time. \u8232 This is called having deep roots and a firm foundation, \u8232 The Tao of long life and eternal vision.\
\'a0\
\uc0\u8232 \
\uc0\u8232 \
#Sixty \uc0\u8232 Ruling the country is like cooking a small fish. \u8232 Approach the universe with Tao, \u8232 And evil is not powerful, \u8232 But its power will not be used to harm others. \u8232 Not only will it do no harm to others, \u8232 But the sage himself will also be protected. \u8232 They do not hurt each other, \u8232 And the Virtue in each one refreshes both.\
\'a0\
\uc0\u8232 \
\uc0\u8232 \
#Sixty-one \uc0\u8232 A great country is like low land. \u8232 It is the meeting ground of the universe, \u8232 The mother of the universe. \u8232 The female overcomes the male with stillness, \u8232 Lying low in stillness.\
Therefore if a great country gives way to a smaller country, \uc0\u8232 It will conquer the smaller country. \u8232 And if a small country submits to a great country, \u8232 It can conquer the great country. \u8232 Therefore those who would conquer must yield, \u8232 And those who conquer do so because they yield.\
A great nation needs more people; \uc0\u8232 A small country needs to serve. \u8232 Each gets what it wants. \u8232 It is fitting for a great nation to yield.\
\'a0\
\uc0\u8232 \
\uc0\u8232 \
#Sixty-two \uc0\u8232 Tao is source of the ten thousand things. \u8232 It is the treasure of the good man, and the refuge of the bad. \u8232 Sweet words can buy honor; \u8232 Good deeds can gain respect. \u8232 If a man is bad, do not abandon him. \u8232 Therefore on the day the emperor is crowned, \u8232 Or the three officers of state installed, \u8232 Do not send a gift of jade and a team of four horses, \u8232 But remain still and offer the Tao. \u8232 Why does everyone like the Tao so much at first? \u8232 Isn't it because you find what you seek and are forgiven when you sin? \u8232 Therefore this is the greatest treasure of the universe.\
\'a0\
\uc0\u8232 \
\uc0\u8232 \
#Sixty-three \uc0\u8232 Practice non-action. \u8232 Work without doing. \u8232 Taste the tasteless. \u8232 Magnify the small, increase the few. \u8232 Reward bitterness with care. \u8232 See simplicity in the complicated. \u8232 Achieve greatness in little things.\
In the universe the difficult things are done as if they are easy. \uc0\u8232 In the universe great acts are made up of small deeds. \u8232 The sage does not attempt anything very big, \u8232 And thus achieved greatness.\
Easy promises make for little trust. \uc0\u8232 Taking things lightly results in great difficulty. \u8232 Because the sage always confronts difficulties, \u8232 He never experiences them.\
\'a0\
\uc0\u8232 \
\uc0\u8232 \
#Sixty-four \uc0\u8232 Peace is easily maintained; \u8232 Trouble is easily overcome before it starts. \u8232 The brittle is easily shattered; \u8232 The small is easily scattered. \u8232 Deal with it before it happens. \u8232 Set things in order before there is confusion.\
A tree as great as a man's embrace springs up from a small shoot; \uc0\u8232 A terrace nine stories high begins with a pile of earth; \u8232 A journey of a thousand miles starts under one's feet.\
He who acts defeats his own purpose; \uc0\u8232 He who grasps loses. \u8232 The sage does not act, and so is not defeated. \u8232 He does not grasp and therefore does not lose.\
People usually fail when they are on the verge of success. \uc0\u8232 So give as much care to the end as to the beginning; \u8232 Then there will be no failure.\
Therefore the sage seeks freedom from desire. \uc0\u8232 He does not collect precious things. \u8232 He learns not to hold on to ideas. \u8232 He brings men back to what they have lost. \u8232 He help the ten thousand things find their own nature, \u8232 But refrains from action.\
\'a0\
\uc0\u8232 \
\uc0\u8232 \
#Sixty-five \uc0\u8232 In the beginning those who knew the Tao did not try to enlighten others, \u8232 But kept it hidden. \u8232 Why is it so hard to rule? \u8232 Because people are so clever. \u8232 Rulers who try to use cleverness \u8232 Cheat the country. \u8232 Those who rule without cleverness \u8232 Are a blessing to the land. \u8232 These are the two alternatives. \u8232 Understanding these is Primal Virtue. \u8232 Primal Virtue is deep and far. \u8232 It leads all things back \u8232 Toward the great oneness.\
\'a0\
\uc0\u8232 \
\uc0\u8232 \
#Sixty-six \uc0\u8232 Why is the sea king of a hundred streams? \u8232 Because it lies below them. \u8232 Therefore it is the king of a hundred streams. \u8232 If the sage would guide the people, he must serve with humility. \u8232 If he would lead them, he must follow behind. \u8232 In this way when the sage rules, the people will not feel oppressed; \u8232 When he stands before them, they will not be harmed. \u8232 The whole world will support him and will not tire of him.\
Because he does not compete, \uc0\u8232 He does not meet competition.\
\'a0\
\uc0\u8232 \
\uc0\u8232 \
#Sixty-seven \uc0\u8232 Everyone under heaven says that my Tao is great and beyond compare. \u8232 Because it is great, it seems different. \u8232 If it were not different, it would have vanished long ago. \u8232 I have three treasures which I hold and keep. \u8232 The first is mercy; the second is economy; \u8232 The third is daring not to be ahead of others. \u8232 From mercy comes courage; from economy comes generosity; \u8232 From humility comes leadership.\
Nowadays men shun mercy, but try to be brave; \uc0\u8232 They abandon economy, but try to be generous; \u8232 They do not believe in humility, but always try to be first. \u8232 This is certain death.\
Mercy brings victory in battle and strength in defense. \uc0\u8232 It is the means by which heaven saves and guards.\
\'a0\
\uc0\u8232 \
\uc0\u8232 \
#Sixty-eight \uc0\u8232 A good soldier is not violent. \u8232 A good fighter is not angry. \u8232 A good winner is not vengeful \u8232 A good employer is humble. \u8232 This is known as the Virtue of not striving. \u8232 This is known as ability to deal with people. \u8232 This since ancient times has been known as the ultimate unity with heaven.\
\'a0\
\uc0\u8232 \
\uc0\u8232 \
#Sixty-nine \uc0\u8232 There is a saying among soldiers: \u8232 I dare not make the first move but would rather play the guest; \u8232 I dare not advance and inch but would rather withdraw a foot. \u8232 This is called marching without appearing to move, \u8232 Rolling up your sleeves without showing your arm, \u8232 Capturing the enemy without attacking, \u8232 Being armed without weapons.\
There is no greater catastrophe than underestimating the enemy. \uc0\u8232 By underestimating the enemy, I almost lost what I value.\
Therefore when the battle is joined, \uc0\u8232 The underdog will win.\
\'a0\
\uc0\u8232 \
\uc0\u8232 \
#Seventy \uc0\u8232 My words are easy to understand and easy to perform, \u8232 Yet no man under heaven knows them or practices them. \u8232 My words have ancient beginnings. \u8232 My actions are disciplined. \u8232 Because men do not understand, they have no knowledge of me.\
Those that know me are few; \uc0\u8232 Those that abuse me are honored. \u8232 Therefore the sage wears rough clothing and holds the jewel in his heart.\
\'a0\
\uc0\u8232 \
\uc0\u8232 \
#Seventy-one \uc0\u8232 Knowing ignorance is strength. \u8232 Ignoring knowledge is sickness. \u8232 If one is sick of sickness, then one is not sick. \u8232 The sage is not sick because he is sick of sickness. \u8232 Therefore he is not sick.\
\'a0\
\uc0\u8232 \
\uc0\u8232 \
#Seventy-two \uc0\u8232 When men lack a sense of awe, there will be disaster. \u8232 Do not intrude in their homes. \u8232 Do not harass them at work. \u8232 If you do not interfere, they will not weary of you.\
Therefore the sage knows himself but makes no show, \uc0\u8232 Has self-respect but is not arrogant. \u8232 He lets go of that and chooses this.\
\'a0\
\uc0\u8232 \
\uc0\u8232 \
#Seventy-three \uc0\u8232 A brave and passionate man will kill or be killed. \u8232 A brave and calm man will always preserve life. \u8232 Of these two which is good and which is harmful? \u8232 Some things are not favored by heaven. Who knows why? \u8232 Even the sage is unsure of this. \u8232 The Tao of heaven does not strive, and yet it overcomes. \u8232 It does not speak, and yet is answered. \u8232 It does not ask, yet is supplied with all its needs. \u8232 It seems to have no aim and yet its purpose is fulfilled.\
Heaven's net casts wide. \uc0\u8232 Though its meshes are course, nothing slips through.\
\'a0\
\uc0\u8232 \
\uc0\u8232 \
#Seventy-four \uc0\u8232 If men are not afraid to die, \u8232 It is no avail to threaten them with death. \u8232 If men live in constant fear of dying, \u8232 And if breaking the law means that a man will be killed, \u8232 Who will dare to break the law?\
There is always an official executioner. \uc0\u8232 If you try to take his place, \u8232 It is like trying to be a master carpenter and cutting wood. \u8232 If you try to cut wood like a master carpenter, you will only hurt your hand.\
\uc0\u8232 \'a0\
\uc0\u8232 \
\uc0\u8232 \
#Seventy-five \uc0\u8232 Why are the people starving? \u8232 Because the rulers eat up the money in taxes. \u8232 Therefore the people are starving. \u8232 Why are the people rebellious? \u8232 Because the rulers interfere too much. \u8232 Therefore they are rebellious.\
Why do the people think so little of death? \uc0\u8232 Because the rulers demand too much of life. \u8232 Therefore the people take death lightly.\
Having little to live on, one knows better than to value life too much.\
\'a0\
\uc0\u8232 \
\uc0\u8232 \
#Seventy-six \uc0\u8232 A man is born gentle and weak. \u8232 At his death he is hard and stiff. \u8232 Green plants are tender and filled with sap. \u8232 At their death they are withered and dry. \u8232 Therefore the stiff and unbending is the disciple of death. \u8232 The gentle and yielding is the disciple of life.\
Thus an army without flexibility never wins a battle. \uc0\u8232 A tree that is unbending is easily broken.\
The hard and strong will fall. \uc0\u8232 The soft and weak will overcome.\
\'a0\
\uc0\u8232 \
\uc0\u8232 \
#Seventy-seven \uc0\u8232 The Tao of heaven is like the bending of a bow. \u8232 The high is lowered, and the low is raised. \u8232 If the string is too long, it is shortened; \u8232 If there is not enough, it is made longer. \u8232 The Tao of heaven is to take from those who have too much and give to those who do not have enough. \u8232 Man's way is different. \u8232 He takes from those who do not have enough and give to those who already have too much. \u8232 What man has more than enough and gives it to the world? \u8232 Only the man of Tao.\
Therefore the sage works without recognition. \uc0\u8232 He achieves what has to be done without dwelling on it. \u8232 He does not try to show his knowledge.\
\'a0\
\uc0\u8232 \
\uc0\u8232 \
#Seventy-eight \uc0\u8232 Under heaven nothing is more soft and yielding than water. \u8232 Yet for attacking the solid and strong, nothing is better; \u8232 It has no equal. \u8232 The weak can overcome the strong; \u8232 The supple can overcome the stiff. \u8232 Under heaven everyone knows this, \u8232 Yet no one puts it into practice. \u8232 Therefore the sage says: \u8232 He who takes upon himself the humiliation of the people is fit to rule them. \u8232 He who takes upon himself the country's disasters deserves to be king of the universe. \u8232 The truth often sounds paradoxical.\
\'a0\
\uc0\u8232 \
\uc0\u8232 \
#Seventy-nine \uc0\u8232 After a bitter quarrel, some resentment must remain. \u8232 What can one do about it? \u8232 Therefore the sage keeps his half of the bargain \u8232 But does not exact his due. \u8232 A man of Virtue performs his part, \u8232 But a man without Virtue requires others to fulfill their obligations. \u8232 The Tao of heaven is impartial. \u8232 It stays with good men all the time.\
\'a0\
\uc0\u8232 \
\uc0\u8232 \
#Eighty \uc0\u8232 A small country has fewer people. \u8232 Though there are machines that can work ten to a hundred times faster than man, they are not needed. \u8232 The people take death seriously and do not travel far. \u8232 Though they have boats and carriages, no one uses them. \u8232 Though they have armor and weapons, no one displays them. \u8232 Men return to the knotting of rope in place of writing. \u8232 Their food is plain and good, their clothes fine but simple, their homes secure; \u8232 They are happy in their ways. \u8232 Though they live within sight of their neighbors, \u8232 And crowing cocks and barking dogs are heard across the way, \u8232 Yet they leave each other in peace while they grow old and die.\
\'a0\
\uc0\u8232 \
\uc0\u8232 \
#Eighty-one \
\uc0\u8232 Truthful words are not beautiful. \u8232 Beautiful words are not truthful. \u8232 Good men do not argue. \u8232 Those who argue are not good. \u8232 Those who know are not learned. \u8232 The learned do not know. \u8232 The sage never tries to store things up. \u8232 The more he does for others, the more he has. \u8232 The more he gives to others, the greater his abundance. \u8232 The Tao of heaven is pointed but does no harm. \u8232 The Tao of the sage is work without effort.\
}